TYPO3 Tutorial for Editors
Extension Key: doc_tut_editors
Language: en
Version: 1.5.0
Keywords: forEditors, forBeginners, tutorial
Copyright 2000-2011, Documentation Team, <documentation@typo3.org>

This document is published under the Open Content License
available from http://www.opencontent.org/opl.shtml

The content of this document is related to TYPO3 
- a GNU/GPL CMS/Framework available from www.typo3.org







Official documentation
This document is included as part of the official TYPO3 documentation. It has been approved by the TYPO3 Documentation Team following a peer-review process. The reader should expect the information in this document to be accurate - please report discrepancies to the Documentation Team (documentation@typo3.org). Official documents are kept up-to-date to the best of the Documentation Team's abilities.
Tutorial
This document is a Tutorial. Tutorials are designed to be step-by-step instructions specifically created to walk a beginner through a particular task from beginning to end. To facilitate effective learning, Tutorials provide examples to illustrate the subjects they cover. In addition, Tutorials provide guidance on how to avoid common pitfalls and highlight key concepts that should be remembered for future reference.
Table of Contents
TYPO3 Tutorial for Editors	1
Introduction	3
About this document	3
What's new	3
Credits	3
Feedback	3
Login	4
Help within TYPO3	4
Overview	5
Menu	5
Page Tree	6
Work area	6
Content Elements	8
Working with Content	8
Creating Content	10
Editing Content	11
The Rich Text Editor	11
Working with Images	13
Working with Files	14
Pages	16
Working with Pages	16
Creating Pages	17
Adding Multiple Pages at Once	19
Working with Languages	21
Next steps	23


Introduction
About this document
This is a short tutorial for editors. 
It first shows you how to log in to TYPO3. TYPO3 has a page tree with the pages, which you can see when you visit your website. On these pages you have content elements, which contain the content, which is present on each page. As an editor you will create and edit content elements and pages. 
This tutorial begins with the tasks, which an editor needs most frequently: Editing existing and creating new content. The following chapters will explain how to edit and create pages. Finally there is a short introduction on working with translations. 
The tutorial provides the most basic instructions step-by-step and illustrated with screenshots. It does not cover all available functions, but the most common ones. 
What's new
This document replaces the old document "typo3_tut". 
Credits
This extension is based on a tutorial extension originally written by Marlies Cohen and a summary / excerpt in the wiki by Eikaa. Susanne Moog did some major updates. Thanks to them all! 
Feedback
For general questions about the documentation get in touch by writing to documentation@typo3.org.
If you find a bug in this manual, please file an issue in this manual's bug tracker:  http://forge.typo3.org/projects/typo3v4-typo3_editor_tutorial/issues
To support the translation to other languages see http://wiki.typo3.org/Doc_tut_editors
Maintaining quality documentation is hard work and the Documentation Team is always looking for volunteers. If you feel like helping please join the documentation mailing list (typo3.projects.documentation on lists.typo3.org).

Login
Let's start from the beginning. Make sure you have javascript and cookies enabled in your browser or it will not work. 
Enter your domain name into the address bar of your internet browser and append "/typo3" to it to get to the "log in" page of your site. For example: http://www.example.com/typo3. 
Now you will see a screen like this:
Figure 1

In the Username box write your username
In the Password box write your password
and then press the [Login] button or hit [Enter]. 
Help within TYPO3
Before we dive further into using TYPO3, I would like to make clear again that even though this tutorial covers the basic features, there are a lot more. Here's where you can learn more directly from within your website: 
A very short description of buttons or functions appears if you hover with your mouse pointer over it.
A lot of times you will see a question mark next to an element. Hovering over it will pop up a little help window about the item or function it is next to. 
For a more extensive description use the manual module in the help category in the menu. 
Overview
You are now in what is called the backend of your site. Usually all changes to the content of the site are done here. Although there are ways to perform frontend editing, this tutorial only covers backend editing. 
The backend is divided into three columns (see Figure 2). By selecting "Page" in the first column, you will see a screen similar to this one: 
Figure 2

The first column [1] is the menu, which is used to select the task you want to perform. The second [2] column contains the page tree, which represents the hierarchy of the pages of the website. The third column [3] is the work area. The fourth area [4] will only be there if you are using version 4.2 or higher, it is called "headerbar". There you find for example the name of the user that is logged in (you!) and the logout button. Use the logout button to close TYPO3. TYPO3 will remember your last work area and come back to it on the next log on. 
What the visitors of the site see is referred to as the frontend = your website. 
Menu
The menu has categories with several modules. In Figure 2 you can see the categories Web, File, User tools, Admin tools and Help and for example the modules Page, View, Versioning, Filelist plus some others and some help modules. The categories and modules available to you depend on how the administrator has setup your account. 
The most used category is Web and the therein contained module Page. It allows you to create and edit webpages, manage different languages and columns of content per page. 
The View module shows the frontend look of the page currently selected in the Page Tree. 
The List module provides low level access to database-records appearing on a page. 
The Versioning module shows versioning and workspace. 
Depending on your settings there might be a User category with a Task Center and / or a Setup option. 
This tutorial does not cover versioning, workspace, user, task center, or setup. 
Also quite important is the Filelist module. It is used to store all kinds of files like pictures, PDFs, etc. on the server. 
All modules are explained in the About modules module in the help category. Please note that the categories can be folded using the little + / - buttons next to the name. 
Page Tree
Figure 3

In the page tree you will see different icons: 
1.This is a standard page 
2.This page is a shortcut, that means, if you visit this page in the frontend you will be redirected to a different page. 
3.This page is not visible in the frontend. It has Hide Page enabled in the page properties. 
4.This one is of the type not in menu. It has Hide in Menu enabled in the page properties. 
5.This is not so much a page but rather a folder, they are used to store all kinds of items, for example news, newsletters, guest book entries, etc. 
6.Clicking on the plus sign expands the directory tree. Clicking on the minus sign contracts the directory tree. 
7.If you created a page and it doesn't appear in the page tree, try reloading it. 
Note that it makes a difference if you click on the icon or on the name of the page. Clicking on the icon will produce a menu with page specific options, while clicking on the name of the page will load the page in the work area. 
Figure 4
Work area
The work area displays the selected module with the content of the page which you have currently selected in the page tree. It is the part of the backend, in which you will do most of your work. Inside the work area you create and edit content and pages. 
The following sections contain all the details about the work area you need to know. 
Content Elements
Working with Content
We will now discuss the work area of the page module, where most of the work is usually done. Don't be scared by the many icons and buttons, as they are somewhat redundant. Use the mouse to point and hover (do not click) over any icon to see a little help text appear. At first we will discuss working with content, later we will talk about how to work with pages. 
Figure 5 shows the work area of the page module after clicking on the name of a page in the page tree. You can see three content elements in the column called normal. 
Figure 5

The first and the third one are of the type text [1 and 3], the second one is of the type text with image [2]. We'll learn more about different content types later on, let's first see what the buttons are about: 
Figure 6

1.This icon represents the content element as a whole. Each content type has a different icon. Clicking on it pops up a menu with content element specific options. 
2.Clicking on the pen lets you edit this element. 
3.Use one of these icons to create a new content element (also called a record) after an existing content element or at the beginning of a column. 
4.This icon also lets you create a new content element, but here you can choose where you want to put it out of a list of all elements on the page. 
5.If you have more than one element in a column, you can move them around using these arrows. 
6.To hide or unhide an element use the light bulb. Notice how the main icon of the the third element also shows that it is hidden. The page icons do the same for pages. 
7.To see hidden elements at all, you must check this option. 
8.Finally, to remove an element as a whole you use the garbage can. 

In TYPO3 version 4.2 the general options are a bit shuffled around as you can see in Figure 7, but still have the same meaning as above:
Figure 7

Creating Content
Once you have clicked to create a new content element, you will see a page with various content types available for selection (Figure 8). Note that the content type selections available to you are dependent on the features you have installed in your TYPO3 system. 
Figure 8

In this image you can then select [1] which type of content you want to have and then [2] where on the page it should appear (use the small grey arrow). The second option is only visible if you haven't already specified where you want to have it. In other words, to see this position selection, you must use the new content icon at the top of the page (Figure 6, Item 4). 
Then you can edit the new content. 

Editing Content
The work area for editing content and for creating content is actually the same. The only difference is that the form is already filled when you edit an existing element. In this section you will find a description of the different parts of the working area when working with a text with image content element. This covers both the text and the images content elements. 
Figure 9

The top area contains the header of the element ([1] in Figure 9), as well as the type [2], which you can change. Be aware that changing a text with image element to a text element will cause it to lose all pictures. 
To save changes you made to the element use the floppy disk icon [3]. If you want to save changes and see them in the frontend use the floppy disk with the magnifying glass [4]. It will save the changes and pop up a window displaying the page you're working on. Disable pop-up-blockers for this site! 
Icon [5] will save the changes and close the content element. You will be brought back to the work area of the page module. 
Icon [6] will go back to the work area of the page module without saving the changes. 
The trash can [7] will delete the current content element. 
The last icon with a small arrow [8] will undo the last saved change made to this content element. 

The Rich Text Editor
The editor is pretty much self explanatory, you have probably worked with similar word processing software before. Depending on how the site was set up, the buttons available to you will vary. Here's an example: 

Figure 10

Common Rich Text Editor (RTE) formatting options include: 
1.bold and italic writing 
2.super and sub script 
3.numbered and unordered lists 
4.indentation of the paragraph 
5.inserting special characters 
6.creation of a hyperlink (only available, if text is selected), see section below 
7.inserting a table 
8.search and replace 
9.show HTML source (only helpful if you know html) 
10.remove unwanted formatting, for example if you copy and paste from MS Word or from another website 
11.undo / redo 
12.toggle borders (for tables) 
Creating a Link

Figure 11

Once you have selected a word or more in the rich text editor and clicked on the Link icon, you have the following options: 
1.Link to a page within your website, just click on the name 
2.Link to a file from the module filelist, more about files later on 
3.Link to another website, just enter the websites address (URL) into the appropriate field and set the link 
4.Link to an email-address, just enter in the right field and set link 
If you have selected an existing link, you can use the Link icon to edit the link. With the leftmost option, Remove Link, you can remove the link. 

Working with Images
Most times you work with images either in the "text with image" or the "images only" content element. These cases are covered here. For working with images it can be helpful to activate the option Show secondary options at the bottom of the page with the edit form. 
Figure 12

1.A list of images currently visible on the page. 
2.Select an image on the left and change the order with these arrows. 
3.Select an image on the left and remove from the list. 
4.To add an image from the filelist on the server, use this folder button. For more information on the filelist see the following section. 
5.To directly upload an image to use it only in this content element use this field. 
6.Place the images relatively to the text. 
7.Set a specific width and / or height for all images in this element. 
8.Turn the images into a link. 
9.Make the fullscreen size of an image available. 
10.Set the image quality. 
11.If you want to have a caption for an image put it in here. For multiple images put each caption in one line. 
You will also see a text area for Alternative Text. It is generally a good idea to write a couple of words describing each picture in one line each. This is especially important for accessibility requirements (for example, Section 508 compliance in the US). 

Working with Files
If you want to include files in your website, you must first upload them to your web server. 
TYPO3 provides the filelist module which can be used to store and browse files on the server. The files which are stored this way are available in the link section of the rich text editor and in the image section of content elements. It is good practice not to upload the files directly in the content elements (Figure 12, Item 5), but to use the filelist as you can reuse the files you upload here while you have to upload them again and again, if you use direct upload. 
Figure 13

1.Select the filelist module. 
2.Where you saw the page tree when you where in the modules in the category Web (e.g. in the page module), there now is the file-tree. Here you might see one or more folders; clicking on the folder icon pops up a menu, clicking on the name shows the content of the folder in the work area. 
3.This is the list of files inside the selected folder. Clicking on the file icon pops up a menu, clicking on the name opens the file. 
4.Add files to this folder using this button. 
5.To show thumbnails of images in this folder check this option. 
If this looks completely different on your site, your site is probably using the extension Media (DAM) (extension key "dam") to organize files. 

Pages
Working with Pages
You have already seen the page tree, now you will learn how pages are created, moved around, hidden and deleted. Here is the context menu which you get when you click on the icon of a page: 
Figure 14

The first three options are the ones which you are likely to use commonly: 
Show opens the page in the View module (like your frontend view).
Edit opens it in the Page module.
New will let you create new content on that page or let you create a new page. 

The other options are not used that often: 
Info is not useful for editors. 
Copy will, surprise, copy the entire page. It will be stored in the TYPO3 clipboard, which is quite similar to the copy and paste you know from the operating system of your computer. 
Cut will make it possible to move the page to a different place. 
Once the page has been copied or cut, the pop up menu of a different page will additionally have the following two entries: 
Paste into will put the page inside the page you clicked on, so that it will appear as a child of that page in the page tree. 
Paste after will put it on the same level of the page tree hierarchy. 
We will neither discuss Versioning here, nor Send to review/pub. 
The More options... field will open yet another menu, with an interesting option called Move page. 
Figure 15

Let me repeat that. Clicking on the icon of a page [1] will pop up a menu and selecting More Options [2] will pop up another menu. Move page [3] lets you select in the work area where the page should be moved, by clicking on one of the grey arrows [4]. 
You can also move files and folders around easily via drag and drop. You can move a page by dragging it with the mouse. If you drop it at another page, you will get a popup window in which you can decide if you want to copy or move the page after or inside the page where you have dropped the other one. Easy, isn't it? 
The Hide option makes the page unreachable in the frontend. 
The Delete option deletes the page altogether. 

Creating Pages
Adding a new page can be done in two ways. 
First make sure that you currently are in a module inside the category Web (e.g. in the page module). 
First way of adding a new Page
Click on any page icon  in the page tree. 
Then from the drop down menu select New. 
Now you will see the screen below in the work area: 
Figure 16

Clicking on any subitem of Create a new page will immediately bring up the New page information. Depending upon your selection you will create a page inside the current one (a subpage), after the current one (a sibling) or you get a wizard in which you can select the position of the page. 
Second way of adding a new Page
Open the page module. 
Click on any name of a page in the page tree. 
The screen below will open in the work area: 
Figure 17

Next click on the button New page. 
You will see the New record screen. 
Now select where you want to add the page in the page tree of your website. (If you place it somewhere by mistake you can always move it with the move page option or by simply dragging it in the page tree later.) 
Once you have decided where to place your new page, click on the little page icon with the arrow pointing to it  and your page will be inserted at this point. 
Figure 18

Once you have created a page, the top part of the page view provides options as shown in Figure 19. 
Figure 19

1.Edit page properties opens work area with some page specific options. For example you can choose to Hide/Unhide the page or you can enter a Navigation title so that the page has a different title in the menu than in the page header. 
2.Move page lets you move the page. As you can see, you often can achieve the same thing by different means. 
3.To create a New page use this button. Alternatively you can also use the one from the context menu. By default, the new page is hidden, so that you can create the content of the page before making it publicly available. Don't forget to Save the new page by using one of the floppy disk icons!

Adding Multiple Pages at Once
If you want to add more than one page at a time you can use the Functions module. 
First select the page in which your new pages should be placed. 
Select the multiple page wizard. 
Figure 20

Now fill in the names of your new pages. (A new page will only be created for fields, which you filled in.) 
If you mark the box Place new pages after the existing subpages the new pages will be added below the currently existing subpages. If you leave it blank, they will be placed above the current pages. 
Once you are done click the Create pages button. 

Working with Languages
If your site is available in multiple languages, you want to have different translations of the same page. Here is what you need to do: 
In the top part of the Page module, you have a drop-down box, where you select the Languages option, as seen in Figure 21. 
Figure 21

If you want to translate an existing page you will can click the button Make new translation of this page [1] with a drop-down menu of the available languages (see Figure 22). Choose the one you want, then enter the new translation of the page name in the field Pagetitle and save. 
Figure 22

Now you can copy the content of the page in the source language to the new language [2]. This is quite useful, if you have images which you would like to see in the version of the new language as well. 
You can also create an entirely new version of the page. 
If this two column mode is a little confusing, you can go back to the old view of the work area by selecting Columns in the dropdown menu, where you previously selected Languages. 
Note that you can now switch between the different translations of the page with another drop-down menu below the one you just used. 

Next steps
If you want more detailed information on how to work with the TYPO3 backend, you should read the Getting Started manual (extension key "doc_tut_quickstart"). It contains more exhaustive information on how to do editor tasks and it also includes basic instructions on some administration tasks like a short section on installing TYPO3 and notes on templates, user management and usage of extensions. 
If you need more information on how to translate a website, you should read the Localization Guide, which you find in TER with the extension key "doc_guide_l10n". It contains information on how to set up a multi-language site and how to actually do the translation and localization. 

